October 1931. Adolf Hitler sits across from the President of Germany for the first time. Paul von Hindenburg, eighty-four years old listens to the leader of the fastest-growing party in the country make his case. And when Hitler leaves, Hindenburg turns to the general who arranged the meeting and delivers his verdict. This "Bohemian corporal", as he calls Hitler, might make an adequate Minister of Posts one day. Chancellor of Germany? Never.

Fifteen months later, Paul von Hindenburg swears Adolf Hitler in as Chancellor of Germany. But because Hitler looks like the defining archetype of the military dictator, what many people do not realise is that Hitler did not come to power through a coup, or as they like to call it in Germany, a putsch. He had of course tried to use the way of the coup a decade before this meeting with Hindenburg but that failed, was imprisoned, had been released and he had decided to go the legal way.

But none of what happened in the fifteen months between the first meeting and becoming Chancellor is what anyone would expect, every month produced more dramatic turn of events than the previous one. But much of the machinations were successful because of the steps laid in the years Hitler's release from prison and even before that. Start with the first lie that made all of it possible. In November 1918, a British general named Neill Malcolm was having dinner with Erich Ludendorff, one of the top military leaders of Germany in the First World War and high command's real strongman, who always complained that the civilian government back home had failed the army. Trying to sum up the general's rambling point in a single sentence, Malcolm asked him: "Do you mean, General, that you were stabbed in the back?" Ludendorff's eyes lit up.

The idea of the stab in the back was fraudulent from its conception because Ludendorff himself had begged for an armistice weeks earlier, telling his own government the war was militarily lost. But the myth didn't need to be true. It needed only to be believable to millions of humiliated Germans looking for someone else to blame and Hitler, the young corporal recovering from a British gas attack in a military hospital was one of the millions who believed it instantly and completely. "The German Army had not been defeated in the field," is how Adolf Hitler liked to put it.

After his recovery, he arrived in Munich in September 1919 as a spy for the army. His job was to check out an obscure club calling itself the German Workers' Party, one of a hundred such fringe groups sprouting in the wreckage of the old empire. The army would send spies to these meetings. One night, he sat through a meeting of maybe twenty-five men in a beer-hall back room but the meeting was unremarkable and he had already begun leaving when a supposed professor in the audience proposed that Bavaria secede from Germany. Hitler stood up and tore into him so violently that the man reportedly fled the hall "like a wet poodle." A locksmith named Anton Drexler, the club's real founder, chased Hitler down afterward and pressed a pamphlet into his hands. Hitler was in a few short weeks enrolled as a member of what would become the Nazi party.

Within a year he'd taken over its propaganda wing and night after night he packed out Munich's largest beer hall for a rallies. By the summer of 1921, while he was traveling in Berlin trying to build outside contacts from his familiar territory of Munich and Bavaria, the committee back home decided he'd grown too dictatorial and tried to merge the party with a rival group to dilute his influence. Hitler raced back to Munich and offered his resignation to the party leaders, betting on his knowledge that the party couldn't survive without its only real speaker and its biggest source of donations. So when the leaders objected to the resignation, he now demanded absolute personal control of the party no committee.

Drexler and the others fought back with a pamphlet accusing Hitler of "a lust for power and personal ambition," of using the party "as a springboard for his own immoral purposes." They weren't wrong but it didn't matter. Hitler sued them for libel and forced Drexler to publicly disavow his own pamphlet and had the party's statutes rewritten to abolish the committee altogether. Drexler was initially moved from his leadership details and given an honorary title and was subsequently erased from the history of the party.

The wider context of Germany's legal structures, like many governments of today, was completely compromised. Weimar Germany's courts were reliably lenient toward right-wing violence and merciless toward the left. After the murders of the Catholic politician Matthias Erzberger in 1921 and the Jewish foreign minister Walther Rathenau in 1922 by men of the extreme right for their attempts to make the peace treaty work, they got light sentences or quiet help escaping. But when the Spartacist rebels attempted a left wing coup which was crushed in 1919, over seven hundred people were charged with treason. Hitler had come to learn in his new political career that violent revolution from the right wing carried almost no legal risk.

In the fall of 1923, Bavaria was still administered by an unofficial triumvirate — Gustav von Kahr as state commissioner, General Otto von Lossow commanding the army in Bavaria and police chief Hans von Seisser. Hitler needed them or needed to force them to be on his side because he'd learned in his Vienna years that a revolution needs the cooperation of existing power and he already knew these men were defiant of Berlin and were flirting with the idea of a coup. When he heard Kahr had scheduled a speech at the Bürgerbräukeller beer hall on the evening of November 8th, with Lossow and Seisser both expected in the audience, Hitler saw his chance to trap all three in one room.

At a quarter to nine, with Kahr thirty minutes into his speech to about three thousand in the beer hall, Nazi storm troopers ringed the hall and Hitler pushed to the front, jumped on a table, and fired a pistol shot into the ceiling. "The National Revolution has begun!" he shouted. He claimed the barracks were occupied and the army and police already marching under the swastika. None of it was true yet. But nobody in the hall knew that. He marched Kahr, Lossow and Seisser at gunpoint into a side room.

It didn't work. All three men sat in silence, unmoved until Hitler rushed back into the hall and lied to the crowd that the triumvirate had already joined him in his stealing of power. All three slipped away the moment they were out of Hitler's sight, and by the time Hitler led a column of three thousand marchers into central Munich, the army and police were waiting for him. Shots were exchanged and sixteen Nazis and three policemen lay dead within a minute. Hitler dislocated his shoulder diving for the pavement in the shootout and just like that, the Beer Hall Putsch was over.

But that wasn't the end for National Socialism as would have been for almost any other party in this position but it was the beginning of the lesson that would put Hitler into Chancellorship less than a decade later. The trial for high treason against Hitler for the attempted coup opened on February 26, 1924, with a compromised judiciary and a Bavarian justice minister who was an old friend of Hitler. He was allowed to interrupt at will, cross-examine anyone and speak for as long as he wanted. The putsch and trial that should have ended him instead made him a national figure for the first time and plastered his name on front pages across Germany and the world.

He was eventually found guilty and sentenced to five years for an offense that, on paper, carried mandatory life imprisonment. He served less than nine months in total in the comfortable quarters at Landsberg prison where he dictated the first volume of what would become Mein Kampf to Rudolf Hess. Years later, he told his old followers that he learnt that it wasn't enough to overthrow a state by force. The new state had to be built up in advance, ready to hand, so that the old one only needed a final shove.

Released from Landsberg at the end of 1924, Hitler made two absolutely important decisions. First, finally concentrate every ounce of party power in his own hands and permanently. Second, pursue power exclusively through constitutional means and not use any armed force. He'd already explained the new strategy to a party comrade while still behind bars: "Instead of working to achieve power by armed coup, we shall have to hold our noses and enter the Reichstag against the Catholic and Marxist deputies. If outvoting them takes longer than outshooting them, at least the result will be guaranteed by their own constitution... Sooner or later we shall have a majority — and after that, Germany."

Over the next five years, he built a shadow state based on his idea that a new state to replace the old state must exist before the revolution. The country was carved into party districts mirroring the real Reichstag electoral map, each with its own appointed boss. They created a parallel bureaucracy with departments of agriculture, justice, economy, and race and culture within the party. There were youth wings, a women's league, professional guilds for doctors and lawyers and teachers, a private court system to keep the party's scandals out of public view. And there were two new bodies of armed men: the S.A. — brute street fighters who had been under the command of Ernst Röhm — and a small black-uniformed bodyguard core for Hitler called the Schutzstaffel, the SS. In 1929 Hitler handed the S.S. to a mild, bookish former chicken farmer Heinrich Himmler.

The most instructive fight of these years, though, wasn't against the Republic. It was inside the party itself. Gregor Strasser was a member of the party and a druggist by trade and a decorated war veteran, built an independent power base across northern Germany that Hitler did not have because his popularity was still confined mostly to Bavaria. Strasser had his own newspaper, his own network of district leaders, and a young recruit with a doctorate as his secretary: Joseph Goebbels. In November 1925, Strasser convened his own conference at Hanover for two reasons. First to push a genuinely socialist program because he was cultivating the socialism aspect of the National socialism by calling for the nationalization of big industry but secondly to informally challenge Hitler's authority. Goebbels at the time reportedly shouted that the party ought to expel "the petty bourgeois Adolf Hitler."
